Docs/sphinx/Ceptr.rst, before:

.. highlight:: rst

.. _sec:ceptr:

CEPTR: Chemistry Evaluation for Pele Through Recasting
======================================================

We use CEPTR to generate C++ mechanism files from `Cantera <https://cantera.org>`_ YAML chemistry files. CEPTR is a python package part of the PelePhysics source code.

.. _sec_ceptr_software:

Software requirements
---------------------

The CEPTR package uses `poetry <https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation>`_ to manage the Python dependencies. Poetry is therefore required to use CEPTR and can typically be installed through system package managers (e.g. HomeBrew) or following the instructions in poetry's documentation.

To install CEPTR dependencies::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry update

.. note:: Note that the install requires a specific Python version, which is specified in the ``Support/ceptr/pyproject.toml``. If a compatible version exists in your system then poetry will try to find and use it. Otherwise, think about using a `conda <https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html>`_ environment to manage packages and their dependencies without tampering with your system. 

Usage
-----

Generating YAML chemistry files: converting from CHEMKIN files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. _sec_convertCK:

We rely on Cantera's ``ck2yaml`` utility to convert CHEMKIN files to the Cantera YAML format::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run ck2yaml --input=${PATH_TO_CHEMKIN_DIR}/mechanism.inp --thermo=${PATH_TO_CHEMKIN_DIR}/therm.dat --transport=${PATH_TO_CHEMKIN_DIR}/tran.dat --permissive

Of course, the files ``tran.dat`` and ``therm.dat`` are optional if already included in the ``mechanism.inp`` file.


Generating Pele-compatible mechanisms for a single chemistry
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are three ways to use CEPTR to generate C++ mechanism files for a given chemistry.

1. Using CEPTR directly:

   Executed from the ``${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr`` directory, the most general usage of CEPTR is::

     $ poetry run convert -f ${PELEPHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/${chemistry}/mechanism.yaml \
       --chemistry {chemistry-type} \
       --gas_name {gas-name} \
       --interface_name {interface-name}

   The ``--chemistry`` (or ``-c``) argument allows users to convey if the ``${chemistry}`` of interest is either one of two valid options, namely, ``homogeneous`` or ``heterogeneous``. The default value for ``{chemistry-type}`` is ``homogeneous``.
   The ``--gas_name`` argument allows users to specify the names of the homogeneous phase to use, as several different ones can be defined in the corresponding ``mechanism.yaml`` file (under the ``phases:`` item). The default value for ``{gas-name}`` is ``gas``.
   Finally, the ``--interface_name`` arguments allow users to specify the name of the gas-solid interface, also prescribed in the corresponding ``mechanism.yaml`` file. The default value for ``{interface-name}`` is ``None``.

   Note that if ``--chemistry heterogeneous`` is specified, the user must necessarily specify a corresponding ``{interface-name}``.

   An example of directly using CEPTR for homogeneous mechanisms is::

     $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
     $ poetry run convert -f ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/LiDryer/mechanism.yaml

   .. note:: CEPTR interpretations of heterogeneous mechanisms is currently a work in progress.

2. Using a helper script in the directory containing the ``mechanism.yaml`` file::

     $ ./convert.sh

   .. note:: It is possible that using this option will require for you to have a valid Cantera installed somewhere. Again, we strongly suggest using a `conda <https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html>`_ environment to install all required package. A simple ceptr environment can be generated using the following yaml script:: 

     $ name: ceptr
     $ channels:  
     $ - conda-forge 
     $ dependencies: 
     $ - python=3.10  
     $ - cantera

3. Using a helper script in the ``Mechanisms`` directory::

     $ bash ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/converter.sh -f ./LiDryer/mechanism.yaml


Generating a reduced, QSS chemistry file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first step consists in generating a QSS chemistry YAML file from a skeletal or a detailed YAML file. To do so, one needs: the mechanism YAML file ``skeletal.yaml``, as well as a list of non-QSS species, ``non_qssa_list.yaml``. The following command will generate a QSS YAML file, ``qssa.yaml``::

    $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
    $ poetry run qssa -f ${PATH_TO_YAML}/skeletal.yaml -n ${PATH_TO_YAML}/non_qssa_list.yaml

The full list of options is::

  $ poetry run qssa -h
  usage: qssa [-h] -f FNAME -n NQSSA [-m {0,1,2}] [-v]

  Mechanism converter

  optional arguments:
    -h, --help            show this help message and exit
    -f FNAME, --fname FNAME
                          Mechanism file
    -n NQSSA, --nqssa NQSSA
                          Non-QSSA species list
    -m {0,1,2}, --method {0,1,2}
                          QSSA method (default: 2)
    -v, --visualize       Visualize quadratic coupling and QSSA dependencies

For a detailed description of these options and a further information on the way QSS mechanism are treated in CEPTR the reader may consult :ref:`the QSS section <sec_qss>`.

To generate a QSS C++ mechanism from the ``.yaml`` file thus created, tailored to your needs, please refer to Tutorials :ref:`Generating NC12H26 QSS mechanism with analytical jacobian <sec_tutqss1>` and :ref:`Generating NC12H26 QSS mechanism without analytical jacobian <sec_tutqss2>`.

Batched generation of Pele-compatible mechanisms 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

   If you are using batched generation as outlined here, it will automatically use multiprocessing to generate the files in parallel using all CPUs detected on the machine. If you want to change that you can pass the optional argument ``-n NPCU``, wheren ``NCPU`` is an integer indicating the number of processes you want to use.


For non-reduced chemistries, CEPTR can take a file with a list of ``mechanism.yaml`` files to convert::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run convert -l ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_mech

For reduced chemistries, CEPTR can take a file with a list of ``qssa.yaml`` and ``qssa_input.toml`` to convert::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run convert -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech

For generating ``qssa.yaml`` for reduced chemistries, CEPTR can take a file with a list of ``skeletal.yaml`` and ``non_qssa_list.yaml``::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run qssa -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech

To generate all mechanisms::

  $ poetry run convert -l ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_mech
  $ poetry run qssa -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech
  $ poetry run convert -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech

Commit message:

add docs on plog mechanism conversion

Docs/sphinx/Ceptr.rst, after:

.. highlight:: rst

.. _sec:ceptr:

CEPTR: Chemistry Evaluation for Pele Through Recasting
======================================================

We use CEPTR to generate C++ mechanism files from `Cantera <https://cantera.org>`_ YAML chemistry files. CEPTR is a python package part of the PelePhysics source code.

.. _sec_ceptr_software:

Software requirements
---------------------

The CEPTR package uses `poetry <https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation>`_ to manage the Python dependencies. Poetry is therefore required to use CEPTR and can typically be installed through system package managers (e.g. HomeBrew) or following the instructions in poetry's documentation.

To install CEPTR dependencies::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry update

.. note:: Note that the install requires a specific Python version, which is specified in the ``Support/ceptr/pyproject.toml``. If a compatible version exists in your system then poetry will try to find and use it. Otherwise, think about using a `conda <https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html>`_ environment to manage packages and their dependencies without tampering with your system.

Usage
-----

Generating YAML chemistry files: converting from CHEMKIN files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
.. _sec_convertCK:

We rely on Cantera's ``ck2yaml`` utility to convert CHEMKIN files to the Cantera YAML format::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run ck2yaml --input=${PATH_TO_CHEMKIN_DIR}/mechanism.inp --thermo=${PATH_TO_CHEMKIN_DIR}/therm.dat --transport=${PATH_TO_CHEMKIN_DIR}/tran.dat --permissive

Of course, the files ``tran.dat`` and ``therm.dat`` are optional if already included in the ``mechanism.inp`` file.


Generating Pele-compatible mechanisms for a single chemistry
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

There are three ways to use CEPTR to generate C++ mechanism files for a given chemistry.

1. Using CEPTR directly:

   Executed from the ``${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr`` directory, the most general usage of CEPTR is::

     $ poetry run convert -f ${PELEPHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/${chemistry}/mechanism.yaml \
       --chemistry {chemistry-type} \
       --gas_name {gas-name} \
       --interface_name {interface-name} \
       --plog_pressure {value in Pa}

   The ``--chemistry`` (or ``-c``) argument allows users to convey if the ``${chemistry}`` of interest is either one of two valid options, namely, ``homogeneous`` or ``heterogeneous``. The default value for ``{chemistry-type}`` is ``homogeneous``.
   The ``--gas_name`` argument allows users to specify the names of the homogeneous phase to use, as several different ones can be defined in the corresponding ``mechanism.yaml`` file (under the ``phases:`` item). The default value for ``{gas-name}`` is ``gas``.
   Finally, the ``--interface_name`` arguments allow users to specify the name of the gas-solid interface, also prescribed in the corresponding ``mechanism.yaml`` file. The default value for ``{interface-name}`` is ``None``.

   Note that if ``--chemistry heterogeneous`` is specified, the user must necessarily specify a corresponding ``{interface-name}``.

   An example of directly using CEPTR for homogeneous mechanisms is::

     $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
     $ poetry run convert -f ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/LiDryer/mechanism.yaml

   .. note:: CEPTR interpretations of heterogeneous mechanisms is currently a work in progress.

   .. note:: CEPTR offers only partial support for mechanisms with pressure-dependent Arrhenius (PLOG) reactions.
             These reactions are fixed to a constant pressure, specified with the ``--plog_pressure`` argument,
             in the CEPTR-generated source code. Mechanims with PLOG reactions generated in this way are limited
             in validity to that specific pressure and would not be suitable for compressible flows with significant
             pressure variation. For that reason, these mechanism source code is saved in pressure-specific directories, for
             example ``${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/POLIMI2020/1_000atm/``.


2. Using a helper script in the directory containing the ``mechanism.yaml`` file::

     $ ./convert.sh

   .. note:: It is possible that using this option will require for you to have a valid Cantera installed somewhere. Again, we strongly suggest using a `conda <https://conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/getting-started.html>`_ environment to install all required package. A simple ceptr environment can be generated using the following yaml script::

     $ name: ceptr
     $ channels:
     $ - conda-forge
     $ dependencies:
     $ - python=3.10
     $ - cantera

3. Using a helper script in the ``Mechanisms`` directory::

     $ bash ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/converter.sh -f ./LiDryer/mechanism.yaml


Generating a reduced, QSS chemistry file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The first step consists in generating a QSS chemistry YAML file from a skeletal or a detailed YAML file. To do so, one needs: the mechanism YAML file ``skeletal.yaml``, as well as a list of non-QSS species, ``non_qssa_list.yaml``. The following command will generate a QSS YAML file, ``qssa.yaml``::

    $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
    $ poetry run qssa -f ${PATH_TO_YAML}/skeletal.yaml -n ${PATH_TO_YAML}/non_qssa_list.yaml

The full list of options is::

  $ poetry run qssa -h
  usage: qssa [-h] -f FNAME -n NQSSA [-m {0,1,2}] [-v]

  Mechanism converter

  optional arguments:
    -h, --help            show this help message and exit
    -f FNAME, --fname FNAME
                          Mechanism file
    -n NQSSA, --nqssa NQSSA
                          Non-QSSA species list
    -m {0,1,2}, --method {0,1,2}
                          QSSA method (default: 2)
    -v, --visualize       Visualize quadratic coupling and QSSA dependencies

For a detailed description of these options and a further information on the way QSS mechanism are treated in CEPTR the reader may consult :ref:`the QSS section <sec_qss>`.

To generate a QSS C++ mechanism from the ``.yaml`` file thus created, tailored to your needs, please refer to Tutorials :ref:`Generating NC12H26 QSS mechanism with analytical jacobian <sec_tutqss1>` and :ref:`Generating NC12H26 QSS mechanism without analytical jacobian <sec_tutqss2>`.

Batched generation of Pele-compatible mechanisms
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. note::

   If you are using batched generation as outlined here, it will automatically use multiprocessing to generate the files in parallel using all CPUs detected on the machine. If you want to change that you can pass the optional argument ``-n NPCU``, wheren ``NCPU`` is an integer indicating the number of processes you want to use.


For non-reduced chemistries, CEPTR can take a file with a list of ``mechanism.yaml`` files to convert::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run convert -l ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_mech

For reduced chemistries, CEPTR can take a file with a list of ``qssa.yaml`` and ``qssa_input.toml`` to convert::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run convert -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech

For generating ``qssa.yaml`` for reduced chemistries, CEPTR can take a file with a list of ``skeletal.yaml`` and ``non_qssa_list.yaml``::

  $ cd ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Support/ceptr
  $ poetry run qssa -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech

To generate all mechanisms::

  $ poetry run convert -l ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_mech
  $ poetry run qssa -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech
  $ poetry run convert -lq ${PELE_PHYSICS_HOME}/Mechanisms/list_qss_mech
